Now that we've talked about
the ForkJoinPool class,
let's talk about an associated
class called the ForkJoinTask.
And here we're going to talk
about the use of ForkJoinTask
and how it serves as essentially
a superclass for other classes
that are used by
application developers
and executed, of course,
by ForkJoinPools.
So a ForkJoinTask is a class
that associates a chunk of data
along with a given
computation on that data.
And its purpose is to enable
fine-grained data parallelism.
So you want to be able to
run lots of ForkJoinTasks
and be able to handle
large amounts of data,
and do it all in parallel.
A ForkJoinTask is intentionally
lighter-weight than a Java
thread.
A Java thread,
which, of course, is
what ultimately executes on
the underlying operating system
threads and process
records and so on,
maintains a lot of stuff.
It maintains its
own runtime stack.
It maintains its own registers.
It maintains its own
thread-specific storage
or thread local storage,
and so on and so forth.
And it's got all kinds of
states and lifecycle states
and so on and so forth.
In contrast, the ForkJoinTask
is just an object.
But the fact that
it's lighter weight
allows the ForkJoinTask to
be created in vast numbers--
probably many more
than you could actually
create real Java threads.
And then those
many ForkJoinTasks
can be multiplexed or run
over a much smaller number
of worker threads in the
context of a ForkJoinPool.
So you may only
have a half dozen
or so Java worker threads.
But you could have thousands or
tens of thousands or hundreds
of thousands of ForkJoinTasks.
And that, again, is
because the worker threads
have all this extra stuff that
the ForkJoinTasks that sit
upon them don't need to have.
ForkJoinTask defines
two key methods
that are used to control
parallel processing
and merging of results.
And not surprisingly,
since the name of this
is the ForkJoinTask, the
methods are fork and join.
Fork arranges to
asynchronously execute
the task it's called on in
the appropriate ForkJoinPool.
So think again
about a ForkJoinTask
as being this lightweight
variant of a thread.
When you fork a
ForkJoinTask, that
doesn't have as much overhead
as starting a thread.
So if you fork a
task, you basically
create a child ForkJoinTask.
And then you can go
ahead and arrange
to have that executed in
one of the real threads
in the underlying ForkJoinPool.
Fork doesn't actually
run the task.
But it simply places it on
a work queue in the calling
worker threads' queue.
Let me try to rephrase that.
When you call fork, it doesn't
run the task immediately.
But it places it on a
queue called a deck--
a double-ended queue--
in the context of the worker
thread where fork was called.
And we'll talk
more about how this
is arranged in just a minute.
The other operation
that's defined,
the other key method that's
defined on ForkJoinTask
is join.
And this returns the
result of the computation
when the computation is done.
So you can see earlier,
we'd do a fork,
which creates child tasks.
And then when those
tasks are done,
join will be able to return
the result of the child task
to the parent task
that forked it.
Unlike Thread join, which
blocks the calling thread,
ForkJoinTask join doesn't
simply block the calling thread,
although it will ensure
that progress does not
continue until we get the result
back from the ForkJoin child
task that just finished.
Instead, what it does is the
join method on a ForkJoinTask
use the worker thread it's
called in to run other tasks.
And this sort of
"pitching in" approach
is what I like to call the
"collaborative Jiffy Lube
model of processing."
For those of you who live in
countries that have Jiffy Lube,
Jiffy Lube is an on-demand
oil-change facility.
So if you want to change
the oil in your vehicle,
you can drive up to Jiffy Lube.
And they'll typically get your
oil changed in a jiffy, which
is why it's Jiffy Lube.
The way Jiffy Lube typically
works is shown in this diagram.
You'll typically have multiple
bays for the cars to go into.
And there'll usually be a
couple of workers per bay.
So in steady state, when
all the bays are full,
all the workers will be working
on their respective cars--
checking fluids, putting
air in the tires,
changing filters, topping off
the oil, changing the oil,
changing the wipers--
whatever they need to do.
If it turns out, for example,
that there's only one car
active in the bays at a
time, then other workers
who are sitting idly
by in their empty bays
can come over to the
bay with a car in it
and then speed things
up by joining in--
by pitching in-- and checking
the air, filling the air,
changing the oil, changing the
wipers, changing the filters,
or whatever.
So that's what I call the
collaborative Jiffy Lube
model, where idle workers can
come over and help pitch in
to make the overall
processing go faster.
When a worker thread
encounters a join,
it processes other
tasks until it notices
that the target's subtask--
in other words, the
thing we called join on--
is done.
And then it goes
ahead and returns,
possibly with a value if
it's a value-returning join.
Now, there's a couple
of different ways
to start the ball rolling.
So in steady state, you'll
have a bunch of ForkJoinTasks
that are processing in the
context of the ForkJoinPool's
worker threads.
But that raises
the question, how
do these ForkJoinTasks
get into worker thread
pool in the first place?
And the answer is, there's
a bunch of methods defined
in ForkJoinPools API that
allows non-ForkJoinTask clients
to submit or to add
ForkJoinTasks to be processed
in the ForkJoinPool.
And those methods are
execute, invoke, and submit.
And they all do something
a little different.
Execute arranges to execute
something asynchronously,
not returning a value.
Invoke will essentially
perform the given task
and then block until we're done.
And submit submits
the ForkJoinTask
and returns a future,
which turns out
to be a ForkJoinTask because
ForkJoinTask implements
the future interface.
We'll come back later and talk
about how these methods work
when we talk about the key
methods in the ForkJoinPool
here shortly.
So just keep that in
the back of your mind.
Clients can insert
new ForkJoinTasks
into the ForkJoinPool via
something called its shared
queue, which is used to
feed work-stealing cues that
are actually managed by worker
threads in the ForkJoinPool.
And the actual implementation
is very, very cool and very,
very subtle.
And I'm not going to talk
about it in great detail now.
We'll cover some of it later.
But in essence, you can
think of the ForkJoinPool
as having a bunch of
data structures inside.
And each worker thread
in the ForkJoinPool
has a dedicated
work queue, which
is this double-ended
queue or deck, that it
interacts with directly.
There's also,
somewhat in parallel
to this, a bunch of
other queues that
can be used to stick work in.
And various threads can then
come along and steal that work
and start processing them
in their particular thread
contexts.
And so when a client calls
execute, invoke, or submit,
it basically ends up putting the
ForkJoinTask into this shared
queue mechanism and
allowing it to be taken
or picked up by one
of the worker threads
in the ForkJoinPool.
I'm kind of glossing
over a lot of details.
But that's basically what's
happening under the hood.
Regardless of the
implementation details,
however, the whole purpose
of doing this work stealing
is to try to maximize
processor core utilization.
And we'll come back and
talk a lot about this
later because it's a
very important concept
to understand.